# Summary
- Repo ([link](https://github.com/NgaiJustin/cs6120-bril/tree/918c5a360b92d480f43160c02f88500308bfcc83))


# Details
I implemented a reference counting based garbage collector for Bril. I modified the existing Typescript bril interpreter to get a new `brili-gc.ts` 

I create a CountedX class which is essentially a generic wrapper that contains a value and a counter. The counter is used to keep track of the number of references to the value. When the counter reaches 0, the value is freed. The CountedX class is used to wrap the values in the interpreter state. The interpreter state is a map of variable names to values. The interpreter state is modified to use CountedX instead of the raw values.

I went through each line of the interpreter and injected the reference counting logic.


# Testing/Evaluation
To test, I added a --gc flag that can be used to enable/disable the garbage collector. I also added a --sf flag that, when toggled, will skip over all the `free` instructions (essentially treating them as `noops`). I also extended the --p flag to also print the heap size after at the end of the program's execution.

I used brench to compare the baseline `brili` implementation with the skip-free no garbage collection version and the skip-free garbage collection version. I used the `remaining_heap_size` as the metric to compare the implementations. The `remaining_heap_size` is the number of values that are still in the heap at the end of the program's execution. The `remaining_heap_size` is extracted from the output of the `brili` implementation using a regex option in brench. If the output matches the baseline, the brench output will display the extracted value which represents the remaining heap size. By comparing the remaining heap size, we can see that the skipfree version has a smaller heap size than the baseline version. Below is the brench output for the mem benchmarks.

`brench.toml`
```toml
extract = 'remaining_heap_size: (\d+)'
benchmarks = '../../benchmarks/mem/*.bril'

[runs.baseline]
pipeline = [
    "bril2json",
    "brili -p {args}",
]

[runs.skipfree]
pipeline = [
    "bril2json",
    "brili-gc --sf -p {args}",
]

[runs.skipfree_gc]
pipeline = [
    "bril2json",
    "brili-gc --sf --gc -p {args}",
]
```
`lesson_tasks/l11/results.csv`
```csv
benchmark,run,result
sieve,baseline,-
sieve,skipfree,1
sieve,skipfree_gc,0

bubblesort,baseline,-
bubblesort,skipfree,1
bubblesort,skipfree_gc,0

primitive-root,baseline,-
primitive-root,skipfree,5
primitive-root,skipfree_gc,0

adler32,baseline,-
adler32,skipfree,1
adler32,skipfree_gc,0

adj2csr,baseline,-
adj2csr,skipfree,4
adj2csr,skipfree_gc,0

basic,baseline,-
basic,skipfree,2
basic,skipfree_gc,0

max-subarray,baseline,-
max-subarray,skipfree,1
max-subarray,skipfree_gc,0

mat-mul,baseline,-
mat-mul,skipfree,4
mat-mul,skipfree_gc,0

fib,baseline,-
fib,skipfree,1
fib,skipfree_gc,0

vsmul,baseline,-
vsmul,skipfree,2
vsmul,skipfree_gc,0

quicksort,baseline,-
quicksort,skipfree,1
quicksort,skipfree_gc,0

two-sum,baseline,-
two-sum,skipfree,2
two-sum,skipfree_gc,0

eight-queens,baseline,-
eight-queens,skipfree,1
eight-queens,skipfree_gc,0

binary-search,baseline,-
binary-search,skipfree,1
binary-search,skipfree_gc,0
```

# Difficulties
I was stuck for a while because I would double increment the reference of the pointer when I intially alloced it, this lead to the GC doing nothing and I was confused as I tripled checked my logic (though in this process I fixed other issues). Eventually when I was about to scratch my CounterX class and just use a seperate map I found the issue.

I intially tested on a handcrafted small example that would allocate a ptr and immediately free it (though this free instruction would be ignored when running with the --sf flag). After handling all the instr level logic with points, I ran the brench tests and found that I had a lot of remaining counts in the heap. I then realized that I was not handling the passing of ptrs across function calls (increment when passed in, and decrement when the stack is popped). After fixing this, I was able to get the remaining heap size down to 0 for all the benchmarks.